# 01. Differentiation

## Geometric Interpretation of Derivative

To find the tangent line to $y = f(x)$ at $P = (x_0, y_0)$, use the following equation:

$$y - y_0 = m (x - x_0)$$

Where:
- $y_0 = f(x_0)$  
- $m = รง_0)$

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f555609d-f168-44ba-90e8-a0bea61cba2b

> $f'(x_0)$, the derivative of $f$ at $x_0$, represents the **slope of the tangent line** to $y = f(x)$ at $P$.  

The **tangent line** is the limit of the **secant line** $PQ$ as $Q \to P$ (keeping $P$ fixed).

$$f'(x) = \lim_{\Delta x \to 0} \frac{f(x + \Delta x) - f(x)}{\Delta x}$$

### Example

$$f(x) = \frac{1}{x}$$

$$f'(x) = \lim_{\Delta x \to 0} \frac{\frac{1}{x + \Delta x} - \frac{1}{x}}{\Delta x} = \lim_{\Delta x \to 0} \frac{\frac{-\Delta x}{x^2 + x \Delta x}}{\Delta x} = \lim_{\Delta x \to 0} \frac{-1}{x^2 + x \Delta x} = \frac{-1}{x^2}$$

### More Notations

$$y = f(x),\qquad \Delta y = \Delta f$$

$$f' = \frac{df}{dx} = \frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{d}{dx}f = \frac{d}{dx}y$$

- $f'$ is Newton's notation.
- $\frac{df}{dx}$ is Leibniz's notation.

$$\frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x}$$ is an average change.
$$\frac{dy}{dx}$$ is an instanteneous rate.

### Example

$$f(x) = x^n,\quad n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$$

The $O((\Delta x)^2)$ terms include $(\Delta x)^2, (\Delta x)^3, \dots$.

$$
\begin{split}
\frac{\Delta f}{\Delta x} \&= \frac{(x + \Delta x)^n - x^n}{\Delta x} = \\\
\&= \frac{x^n + nx^{n-1} \Delta x + O((\Delta x)^2) - x^n}{\Delta x} = \\\
\&= nx^{n-1} + O(\Delta x) \xrightarrow[\Delta x \to 0]{} nx^{n-1}
\end{split}
$$

This rule extends to polynomials:

$$\frac{d}{dx}(x^3 + 5x^{10}) = 3x^2 + 50x^9$$

## Limits and Continuity

### 1. Easy Limits

$$\lim_{x \to 4} \frac{x + 3}{x^2 + 1} = \frac{4 + 3}{4^2 + 1} = \frac{7}{17}$$

### 2. Derivatives are Always Harder

$$\lim_{x \to x_0} \frac{f(x_0 + \Delta x) - f(x_0)}{x - x_0}$$

$x = x_0$ gives $\frac{0}{0}$, requiring simplification.

- $\lim_{x \to x_0^+} f(x)$ = right-hand limit ($x > x_0$)
- $\lim_{x \to x_0^-} f(x)$ = left-hand limit ($x < x_0$)

### Example

$$f(x) = \begin{cases}x + 1, & x > 0 \\\ -x + 2, & x < 0\end{cases}$$

$$\lim_{x \to 0^+} f(x) = \lim_{x \to 0} x + 1 = 1$$  
$$\lim_{x \to 0^-} f(x) = \lim_{x \to 0} -x + 2 = 2$$

### Continuity

> $f$ is continuous at $x_0$ if $\lim_{x \to x_0} f(x) = f(x_0)$.

1. $\lim_{x \to x_0} f(x)$ exists (left and right limits are equal).
2. $f(x_0)$ is defined.
3. $\lim_{x \to x_0} f(x) = f(x_0)$.

### Types of Discontinuities

#### Jump Discontinuity
- $\lim$ from left and right exists but they are not equal.

#### Removable Discontinuity
- $\lim$ from left and right are equal, but $f(x_0)$ is not defined or incorrect.

**Example:**
Removable discontinuity at $x = 0$:

$$\lim_{x \to 0} \frac{\sin{x}}{x} = 1$$  
$$\lim_{x \to 0} \frac{1 - \cos{x}}{x} = 0$$

#### Infinite Discontinuity
- The function diverges to $\infty$ or $-\infty$.

**Example:**

$$y = \frac{1}{x}$$  
$$\lim_{x \to 0^+} \frac{1}{x} = \infty$$  
$$\lim_{x \to 0^-} \frac{1}{x} = -\infty$$  

### Special Case: $y = \sin{\frac{1}{x}}$
- No left or right limit as $x \to 0$.

> If $f$ is differentiable at $x_0$, then $f$ is continuous at $x_0$.

